---
layout: guide
group: guide
title: Features
version: 5
---

# Features Support

The following guide provides an overview of Elide features and links to their respective documentation.

## Common API Features

- **Rich Filter Support** - Support for complex filter predicates including conjunction (logical and), disjunction (logical OR) and parenthetic expressions for both [GraphQL](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11-graphql.html#filtering) and [JSON-API](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/10-jsonapi.html#filtering).  Support for filtering on fields in related models.
- **Collection Sorting** - Sort collections by one or more fields in the current or related models in [GraphQL](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11-graphql.html#sorting) and [JSON-API](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/10-jsonapi.html#sorting).
- **Pagination** - Support to paginate collections and request the total number of pages or records in [GraphQL](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11-graphql.html#pagination) and [JSON-API](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/10-jsonapi.html#pagination).
- **Type Coercion** - Support to [type coerce](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/09-clientapis.html#type-coercion) fields between the API representation and the model representation.  Register your own custom data type serializers/deserializers.
- **Synchronous or Asynchronous API** - Elide supports both synchronous and asynchronous APIs for short and long running queries.

## Data Modeling Features

- **Lifecycle Hooks** - Register [custom functions & business logic](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/02-data-model.html#lifecycle-hooks) that get invoked whenever your data model is read or manipulated.
- **Security** - Assign [permission rules](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/03-security.html) to fields and entities in your data model using a custom security DSL.  Bind rules to in-memory functions or security filters that are pushed to the persistence layer.
- **Computed Attributes & Relationships** - Define [custom fields and relationships](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/02-data-model.html#computed-attributes) that are computed at query time.
- **API Versioning** - [Version your models](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/02-data-model.html#api-versions) to support schema evolution without breaking your client contracts.
- **Composite Identifiers** - Support both simple and complex [model identifiers](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/02-data-model.html#model-identifiers) including compound types.

## JSON-API Features
- **Swagger** - Elide can automatically generate [Swagger documentation](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/13-swagger.html) for Elide APIS for schema introspection. 
- **Test DSL** - Elide includes a [test DSL](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/14-test.html) that works with [Rest Assured](https://rest-assured.io/) for writing readable integration tests.

## GraphQL Features
- **GraphQL Schemas** - The GraphQL specification includes type introspection that integrates with tools like [Graphiql](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql).
- **Test DSL** - Elide includes a [test DSL](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/14-test.html) that works with [Rest Assured](https://rest-assured.io/) for writing readable integration tests.

## Persistence Features
- **JPA Store** - The [JPA store](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/06-datastores.html#jpa-store) persists Elide models decorated with JPA annotations.
- **In-Memory Store** - The [in-memory store](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/06-datastores.html#in-memory-store) persists Elide models locally in the server's memory.
- **Search Store** - The [search store](https://github.com/yahoo/elide/tree/master/elide-datastore/elide-datastore-search) provides full text search on annotated fields in Elide models.  It works in conjunction with the JPA store.
- **Multiple Stores** - Elide services can be configured with [multiple data stores](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version}}/06-datastores.html#multiple-stores) - each managing a different set of models.
- **Custom Stores** - Elide can be extended to talk to web services or other persistence layers by writing [custom stores](/pages/guide/v5/06-datastores.html#custom-stores).
- **Server Side Filtering, Sorting, & Pagination** - For custom stores that cannot filter, sort, or paginate natively, Elide can optionally perform these functions on the server.

## Analytic Features
- **Analytic Query Support** - Elide's [aggregation store](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/04-analytics.html) exposes read-only models that support data analytic queries.  Model attributes represent either metrics (for aggregating, filtering, and sorting) and dimensions (for grouping, filtering, and sorting).
- **Virtual Semantic Layer** - Analytic models are configured with a [semantic modeling language](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/04-analytics.html#model-configuration) that allows non-developers the ability to define metrics and dimensions by writing templated native SQL fragments.   The fragments are assembled into complete SQL statements at query time.
<!-- - **Yavin Integration** - Elide integrates with [yavin](yavin.dev) - a companion UI framework for visualizing data, building dashboards, and scheduling reports. -->
- **Caching** - The aggregation store includes a [customizable cache](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/16-performance.html#aggregationdatastore-cache).  The cache supports time and version based strategies for expunging stale data.
- **Data Export** - Elide includes a data export API for streaming large query results in JSON or CSV formats.

## Operability Features
- **Logging** - Elide supports rich [native logging](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/12-audit.html) for query generation and security rules.
- **Spring Integration** - Elide integrates with [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot) including an [example project](https://github.com/yahoo/elide-spring-boot-example) and [starter package](https://github.com/yahoo/elide/tree/master/elide-spring).
- **Elide Standalone Integration** - Elide includes [JAX-RS](https://download.oracle.com/otndocs/jcp/jaxrs-2_0-fr-eval-spec/index.html) endpoints and can run as a [standalone](https://github.com/yahoo/elide-standalone-example) embedded Jetty service.
