---
layout: guide
group: guide
subtopic: true
title: Async API
version: 5
---

## Overview

Elide APIs are designed for synchronous request and response behavior. The time allowed to service a synchronous response can be limited by proxy servers and gateways. Analytic queries can often take longer than these limits and result in a server timeout. Elide's asynchronous API decouples the submission of a request and the delivery of the response into separate client calls. Some of the features available are:
* Queries are run in a background thread that posts the results into a persistence store.
* Results can be retrieved as an embedded response or URL for downloading later (to be available soon).
* Supported downloading formats - CSV and JSON.
* Queries can be configured to execute synchronously before switching to asynchronous mode if not finished by a client provided threshold.
* Queries that interrupted due to an application crash/reboot are automatically flagged as TIMEDOUT.
* Persisted queries and results are deleted after a configurable threshold.

## Design

#### API
The Async API supports two different query abstractions, built using standard Elide models (AsyncQuery and TableExport):
* Any read-only API request in JSON-API or GraphQL can be submitted by creating an AsyncQuery object. After creation, the client can poll the AsyncQuery object asynchronously for status updates. Once complete, the AsyncQuery object stores the the query result as an embedded attribute.
* For large response bodies, Elide supports a streaming abstraction called TableExport. It works similarly to the AsyncQuery model but with three important differences:
   * TableExport can only be leveraged for queries where:
      * The model being queried has no relationships.
      * The GraphQL query document is not an array (no multiple queries).
   * Upon completion, the TableExport model includes a separate URL attribute which references the query results for streaming downloads.
   * The results of the GraphQL or JSON-API query are converted into a simple, flat JSON or CSV format.

For request submissions and results retrieval, refer the example [calls](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11.5-asyncapi.html#running).

#### Threading
Each Elide instance runs a scheduler which is responsible for executing these requests in the background threads. Async requests submitted with the QUEUED status and valid options are queued for execution. The requests are picked for execution as the threads become available. Upon completion, the background thread posts the query status and results to a persistent store. The size of the thread pool can be configured as mentioned [here](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11.5-asyncapi.html#additional-configuration).

#### Async After
The Async requests can be configured to execute synchronously up to 10 seconds before switching to asynchronous mode. The requests not finished synchronously by the client provided threshold are handed off to a separate thread for posting the results once complete.

#### Background Cleaner
Each Elide instance will also run a scheduler for maintenance and cleanup.
* It cleans up requests and results stored in the persistent store.
* It scans and flags the queries that failed due to an application crash/reboot automatically as TIMEDOUT.
* It is responsible for graceful cancellation of async requests.
  * The user can at any time update the status of the async requests to CANCELLED. The background process polls the AsyncQuery and TableExport models to find any new requests that were CANCELLED and tries to terminate the transaction associated with that execution and change the status to CANCEL_COMPLETE.
  * The transactions spawned by the async requests which have been executing longer than the configured max run time threshold are terminated. This results in the background thread executing the original request to be interrupted.
* The retention, polling interval and max run time thresholds can be configured during application startup.
* This scheduler can be disabled by setting `cleanupEnabled` to false as mentioned [here](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11.5-asyncapi.html#enable-the-async-api).

#### Supported Query Types

Below are the supported values for query type in asynchronous calls:

* GRAPHQL_V1_0
* JSONAPI_V1_0

#### Supported Result Types

Below are the supported values for result type in asynchronous calls (Table Export only):
<!---TODO add details on conversion logic --->
* JSON
* CSV

#### Query Status

Below are the different possible statuses of asynchronous calls:

| Status          | Description                                                                           |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| QUEUED          | Async request is submitted and waiting to be picked up for execution.                 |
| PROCESSING      | Async request has been picked up for execution.                                       |
| COMPLETE        | Async request has completed.                                                          |
| CANCELLED       | Any running request can be moved to the CANCEL state by the client. A background thread will release the resources and mark the request as CANCEL_COMPLETE|
| TIMEDOUT        | Async request did not finish within the configured maximum run time.                  |
| FAILURE         | Async request not completed due to failure encountered by the background process.     |
| CANCEL_COMPLETE | Async request has been cancelled by the background process.                           |
{:.table}

Malformed or invalid queries provided in the Async request will finish with COMPLETE status and the actual error message will be
available in the result property of AsyncQuery and TableExport models.

## Security

The Async API models (AsyncQuery and TableExport) have a simple permission model: Only the principal which submitted a query and principals which belong to an administrative role are allowed to retrieve its status or results. Principals can be assigned roles when constructing the Elide [user](/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/03-security.html#user) object.

## Enable the Async API

By default the async API is disabled. The elide models (AsyncQuery and TableExport) needed to support the Async API are JPA [models][demo-schema] that are mapped to a specific database schema. This schema must be created in your target database. Feel free to modify the query/result column sizes per your needs.

| Configuration       | Description                                                                                | Default  |
| ---------------     | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------      | -------  |
| enabled             | Enable the Async API feature.                                                              | false    |
| cleanupEnabled      | Enable cleaning up of Async API requests history, update status of interrupted/timedout requests and cancel requests. | false    |
{:.table}

{% include code_example example="async-api-enable" %}

#### Additional Configuration

These additional configuration settings control timeouts, cleanup and the sizes of thread pools.

| Configuration                     | Description                                                             | Default  |
| ---------------                   | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------  |
| threadPoolSize                    | Number of Async requests to run in parallel.                            | 5        |
| maxRunTimeMinutes                 | Maximum query run time for Async requests before TIMEDOUT.              | 60       |
| queryCleanupDays                  | Number of days to retain async request executions and results history.  | 7        |
| queryCancellationIntervalSeconds  | A background process is responsible for cancelling the transactions for Async requests marked as CANCELLED and changing the status to CANCEL_COMPLETE. Polling interval to identify CANCELLED async requests and update status. | 300 |
{:.table}

{% include code_example example="async-api-additional-config" %}

## Running

After configuring and starting your service, the following commands illustrate how to make asynchronous requests. Don’t forget to replace localhost:8080 with your URL. The example below makes use of the models and sample data that the liquibase migrations added through our example is [available here][elide-demo].

#### Submitting query

{% include code_example example="async-api-submit" %}

Here are the respective repsonses:

{% include code_example example="async-api-submit-rsp" %}

#### Retrieving status and result

{% include code_example example="async-api-status" %}

Here are the respective repsonses:

{% include code_example example="async-api-status-rsp" %}

## Overriding the AsyncQueryDAO

The Async API interacts with the persistence layer through an abstraction - the AsyncQueryDAO, for status updates, query cleanup, etc. This can be customized by providing your own implementation. Elide provides a default implementation of [AsyncQueryDAO][default-async-query-dao].

{% include code_example example="async-api-dao-disabled" %}

## Overriding the ResultStorageEngine

Table exports leverage a reactive abstraction (ResultStorageEngine) for streaming results to and from a persistence backend. This can be customized by providing your own implementation. Elide provides default implementation of [ResultStorageEngine][file-result-storage-engine].

{% include code_example example="async-api-storageengine-disabled" %}

<!---TODO replace below links when merged to master --->
[demo-schema]: /pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11.5-asyncapi.html#enable-the-async-api
[file-result-storage-engine]: /pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11.5-asyncapi.html#overriding-the-resultstorageengine
[default-async-query-dao]: /pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11.5-asyncapi.html#overriding-the-asyncquerydao
[elide-demo]: /pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11.5-asyncapi.html#running
