---
layout: guide
group: guide
subtopic: true
title: GraphQL Subscriptions
description: GraphQL Subscriptions
version: 6
---

# 5-Minute Overview

We'll be leveraging the [elide-spring-boot-example][example-project] project to illustrate how to use subscriptions.

## Decorate an Elide Model

A subscription can be made from any Elide model simply by annotating it with `Subscription`:


```java
@Include(name = "group")
@Subscription
@Data
public class ArtifactGroup {
    @Id
    private String name;

    @SubscriptionField
    private String commonName;

    @SubscriptionField
    private String description;

    @SubscriptionField
    @OneToMany(mappedBy = "group")
    private List<ArtifactProduct> products;
}
```

The subscription annotation takes zero or more _operations_ which correspond to different topics.  

```java
@Include
@Subscription(operation = { CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE });
class Book {
  ...
}
```

Whenever a model is manipulated (created, deleted, or updated), elide will post a JSON serialized model to a JMS topic for that operation.  Only the fields decorated with `@SubscriptionField` will be serialized (and hence available to be consumed in the subscription).  It is also possible to define [custom operations](#custom-subscriptions) that are triggered by your service business logic.


## Run Queries

Elide subscriptions are implemented using websockets.  Websockets require a protocol to send and receive messages.  Elide supports the [graphql-ws](https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-ws) protocol.  This protocol works both with the [Apollo GraphQL](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/data/subscriptions/) client as well as [Graphiql](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql).  If you run the [example project][example-project], it comes bundled with Graphiql. 

Elide's subscription API is similar to its API for queries and mutations, but there are some notable differences:
1. Each Elide model annotated with `Subscription` is a root field in the GraphQL schema.
2. Each root model supports a topic (ADDED, DELETED, UPDATED) variable and an optional [filter variable](#filtering).
3. Responses are not wrapped in 'edges' and 'node' because there is no pagination.
4. The API is read only.

### Simple Query

Query for newly added 'groups' returning their name and description:

```
subscription { group(topic : ADDED) { name description } }
```

The response will look like:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "group": {
      "name": "new group",
      "description": "foo"
    }
  }
}

```

If there are errors, they will get reported in an errors field:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "group": {
      "name": "new group",
      "commonName": "",
      "nope": null
    }
  },
  "errors": [
    {
      "message": "Exception while fetching data (/group/nope) : ReadPermission Denied",
      "locations": [
        {
          "line": 2,
          "column": 53
        }
      ],
      "path": [
        "group",
        "nope"
      ],
      "extensions": {
        "classification": "DataFetchingException"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Filtering

All elide subscriptions support RSQL filtering that is identical to [filtering for queries and mutations]({{site.baseurl}}/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/11-graphql.html#filtering). The following query filters artifact group creation events by the name 'com.yahoo.elide':

```
subscription { group(topic : ADDED, filter: "name='com.yahoo.elide'") { name description } }
```

# Security

Elide honors [ReadPermission annotations]({{site.baseurl}}/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/03-security.html#read) for all subscription fields in the model.   Subscriptions are automatically filtered by any [FilterExpressionChecks]({{site.baseurl}}/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/03-security.html#filter-expression-checks).  Client requests to unauthorized fields will result in errors returned in the subscription response payload.

See the section on [Authentication](#authentication) for details on how to build an Elide user principal.

# Configuration

## JMS Message Broker

Elide leverages JMS to post and consume subscription messages.  The example project runs an embedded (in-memory) broker.  You will want to replace this with a dedicated broker in production.

{% include code_example example="subscription-broker" %}

## Global Settings

Elide subscriptions support the following, global configuration settings:
1. **enabled** - Turn on/off the subscription websocket.
2. **path** - The HTTP root path of the subscription websocket.
3. **idleTimeoutMs** - How long in milliseconds the websocket can remain idle before the server closes it.
4. **maxMessageSize** - Maximum size in bytes of any message sent to the websocket (or it will be closed in error).
5. **maxSubscriptions** - The maximum number of concurrent subscriptions per websocket.
6. **connectionTimeoutMs** - The time in milliseconds for the client to initiate a connection handshake before the server closes the socket.

{% include code_example example="subscription-settings" %}

## Authentication

There is no well defined standard for how user credentials are passed via websockets.  Instead, Elide allows developers to provide a function that maps a [JSR-356 Session](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/websocket/Session.html) to and Elide [User object]({{site.baseurl}}/pages/guide/v{{ page.version }}/03-security.html#user).  The session contains the HTTP request headers, path parameter, query parameters, and websocket parameters that can be leveraged to construct a user principal.

{% include code_example example="subscription-authentication" %}

## JMS Message Settings 

It is possible to override some of the default settings for messages published to JMS topics by overriding the following bean:

{% include code_example example="subscription-message-settings" %}

# Custom Subscriptions

While Elide makes it easy to subscribe to model manipulations (create, update, and delete), it is also possible to add a subscription topic for another event tied to your business logic.  A custom subscription is simply an Elide model annotated with the `@Subscription` annotation that explicitly sets the list of operations to empty:

```java
@Include

//This is a custom subscription
@Subscription(operations = {})
@Data
@AllArgsConstructor
@NoArgsConstructor
public class Chat {


    @Id
    long id;

    @SubscriptionField
    String message;
}
```

To publish to your subscription, you can create a lifecycle hook on another model that posts `Chat` messages.


{% include code_example example="subscription-custom" %}

# Recommendations

Even though the [example project][example-project] runs GraphQL queries, mutations, and subscriptions in the same service, it is highly recommended that subscriptions run as a separate service.  Because websockets are long lived and stateful, they impose different resource constraints and performance characteristics from queries and mutations.

Running websockets as a standalone service is as simple as disabling JSON-API and GraphQL HTTP endpoints:

{% include code_example example="subscription-standalone" %}

[example-project]: https://github.com/yahoo/elide-spring-boot-example
